Title: Here’s How To Defend The Jab In Muay Thai | Evolve Daily
URL: https://evolve-mma.com/blog/heres-how-to-defend-the-jab-in-muay-thai/
Source Type: Web Article

Ask any boxer or Muay Thai fighter, and they’ll tell you that one of the most important weapons in his arsenal is the jab. A linear strike thrown with one’s lead hand to his/her opponent’s head or body, the jab is the simplest way to measure range, upset your opponent and conserve energy for more powerful attacks.

Because of it’s simplicity, the jab is often dismissed as a KO punch. However, if used wisely and properly, the simple jab could be enough to knock one’s opponent out, making it very dangerous. Thus, knowing how to defend the jab is one of the most important lessons one could ever learn. In this video, multiple-time Muay Thai World Champion Nong-O Gaiyanghadao shows 5 essential ways to defend the jab :

5 Essential Ways In Muay Thai To Defend A Jab

1) Outside Parry And Sidestep

To perform an outside parry, catch your opponent’s lead jab with the palm of the open right glove, pushing up and out to the right. This puts you out of your opponent’s line of attack, creating an angle for your counterattack.

2) Parry Down

The parry down is the easiest and most straightforward defense against the left jab. It requires zero strength and should feel like a natural reflex. However, you must remember to perform this movement with speed. As your opponent goes in for the left jab, flick your right hand across his wrist, forcing his glove to the left. This will leave the left side of his body exposed, giving you space to attack.

3) Slip Outside

As your opponent goes for the jab, turn your body to the right, outside of your opponent’s arm so you catch the blow on your left deltoid. Move your left shoulder upward and drop your body weight back over your right leg. As your right hand drops, use this momentum to go for a body shot. Slipping outside also makes it difficult for your opponent to defend the counter attack.

4) Slip Inside

Avoid your opponent’s jab by dropping your body down to the left. As you drop your body down, this creates the perfect angle for a left uppercut to the body. The slip needs perfect timing – you must perform it at the precise moment you avoid the blow to be effective. Doing so will give you the element of surprise you need to attack your opponent.

5) Duck Under

As your opponent goes for the jab, drop your body forward, going under your opponent’s blow. This not only allows you to avoid the jab, but also helps you stay in the range you need for your counter attack.

The best way to work on your defense is to follow each technique with a counterattack. Doing so will enable you to get in the habit of counterattacking and defending at the same time. As with all techniques, ensure that you practice these consistently in order to make them part of your arsenal. So go forth and train hard!

Evolve Mixed Martial Arts® is Asia's premier championship brand for martial arts. It has authentic World Champions in Muay Thai, Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu, Mixed Martial Arts, Boxing, Wrestling, and No-Gi Grappling. Named as the #1 ranked martial arts organization in Asia by CNN, Yahoo! Sports, FOX Sports, ESPN StarSports, Tokyo Times, and many other leading authorities, Evolve MMA aims to deliver the best martial arts instruction available anywhere on the planet.

Everyone loves a good submission finish in an MMA fight. Grapplers, wrestlers, BJJ specialists, and sometimes even strikers turn to submissions as a means to end a fight. And out of all the submissions, nothing…

There’s no doubt that the half guard is one of the most versatile positions in BJJ. Developed in the 1990’s by Roberto “Gordo” Correa, legend has it that Gordo developed the move as a means…

The clinch is a technical aspect of Muay Thai that requires you to hold your opponent in order to launch your attacks, or most commonly, knee strikes. It is the best way to close the…

If you’ve been training BJJ for awhile, you’d know how difficult it is to counter the toreando pass. If performed with great timing and force, it is almost impossible to defend. The toreando, or toureando,…

The switch kick is one of the most devastating strikes a Muay Thai fighter could ever have in his arsenal of weapons. Known for its power and the speed in which the kick is executed…

Any Muay Thai practitioner knows the devastating power behind the knee strike. It is most often used in the clinch and in close range. The knee is one of the most powerful weapons a Muay…

Summary Professional boxing is governed by four major sanctioning bodies that award world championship belts across multiple weight divisions: the World Boxing Association (WBA), World Boxing Council (WBC), International Boxing Federation (IBF), and World Boxing…

Summary The southpaw stance is one of the most disruptive and misunderstood positions in combat sports. Defined by a right-foot-forward, left-hand-rear alignment, the southpaw flips the geometry of every exchange, forcing orthodox opponents to adjust…

Summary In Muay Thai, the clinch is not a stalling tactic; it is a complete fighting system where many bouts are won and lost. This article breaks down the six essential clinch grips (double collar-tie,…

Summary In boxing, knockouts are rarely accidental, they are the result of precise technique, timing, and the effective use of high-impact punches. This article highlights three of the most effective knockout punches: the cross, the…

Summary Everyone has a natural fighting style. Some instinctively look to bombard opponents with volume, while others prefer a more cautious approach. Some people feel more comfortable throwing strikes at attackers, while others prefer to…

Summary Oleksandr Usyk is considered one of the greatest boxers today. Still undefeated, Oleksandr has recently defeated boxing heavyweight giants like Anthony Joshua (twice), Daniel Dubois, and Tyson Fury (twice). While he’s still relatively new…

LIVE LIKE A WARRIOR

Enter your email below and get inspired to unleash your greatness

Evolve Daily guarantees 100% privacy. Your information will not be shared.