Title: Muay Thai Clinch - A How-To Guide from the Experts - Muay Thai
URL: https://muaythai.com/muay-thai-clinch/
Source Type: Web Article

The Muay Thai clinch is one of the most unique aspects of the art of eight limbs . The clinch, sometimes called the plumb, is not found in other striking arts such as kickboxing or boxing.

This guide will offer several tips on how to effectively utilize the Muay Thai clinch, from basics to advanced techniques, as taught by the experts. Above all, one tip that must be followed throughout the entire guide: do not interlace your fingers! It feels natural, but it is a good way to have your fingers broken.

A Muay Thai clinch is when a fighter has their hands grasped behind their opponent’s head, with a grip of palm to the back of the hand, again, not interlacing fingers.

Every fighter dreams of looking like Anderson Silva or Dieselnoi , but one must learn the basic of the clinch before mastering advanced techniques. If the Muay Thai clinch is done effectively then it can lead to one’s opponent being knocked out. If the clinch is done wrong, then it will lead to you being knocked out.

There are six basic Muay Thai clinch positions. Multi-time Rajdamnern and Lumpinee Stadium world champions Sagetdao Petpayathai and Dejdamrong Sor Amnuaysirichokewill start us off with the basics . In a video with the Evolve MMA gym in Singapore, these two Muay Thai masters teach the six basic positions.

See below for a visual guide of each technique:

“MUAY THAI: 6 Basic Muay Thai Clinch Positions | Evolve University … In this video, multiple-time Muay Thai World Champion and Muay Thai Legend Sagetdao Petpayathai from the Evolve Fight Team shows the 6 basic Muay Thai Clinch positions for knee and elbow strikes. A 4x Lumpinee Stadium Champion and 1x Rajdamnern Stadium Champion, Sagetdao is known as one of the best Muay Thai clinch and knee fighters of his era.”

It can be exhausting and draining to drill clinch techniques with a partner. But one can practice Muay Thai clinch technique on the heavy bag in an effort to improve. Multi-time Muay Thai world champion Sam-A Gaiyanghadao offers tips on how Nak Muays can practice the Muay Thai clinch on the heavy bag. With Evolve MMA, Sam-A teaches:

Round 1: Straight knees – 3 Minutes

Round 2: Jumping straight knees – 3 Minutes

Round 3: Step, Turn, Straight Knee – 3 Minutes

There are two more drills . One can enjoy a visual guide of all these in the video with Evolve MMA below:

“Muay Thai Clinching Bag Drills For Beginners | Sam-A Gaiyanghadao … Multiple-time Muay Thai World Champion Sam-A Gaiyanghadao from the EVOLVE Fight Team demonstrates clinching bag drills for beginners!”

Nong-O is one of the most well-rounded Nak Muays of this generation. He is knowledgeable in the Art of Eight Limbs in every facet. Alongside Evolve MMA, Nong-O offers a detailed breakdown of how to strike from the inside clinch position. He teaches:

See below for a visual step-by-step guide with Nong-O:

“Muay Thai | How To Strike From The Inside Clinch Position … Muay Thai World Champions Nong-O Gaiyanghadao and Penaek Sitnumnoi from the EVOLVE Fight Team demonstrate how to strike from the inside clinch position!”

MMA and Muay Thai has seen some absolute destructive forces of Muay Thai clinching in high levels bouts. Starting in MMA, Chute Boxe fighters Anderson Silva,  Mauricio ‘Shogun’ Rua, and Wanderlei Silva were all powerful strikers utilizing the Muay Thai clinch.

Wanderlei Silva and Mauricio ‘Shogun’ Rua were feared in the PRIDE FC due to their utter destruction using the Thai clinch against skilled fighters such as Quinton ‘Rampage’ Jackson.

Brazil’s Anderson ‘The Spider’ Silva was able to capture the UFC Middleweight World Title against Rich ‘Ace’ Franklin using the Thai clinch. The US-born Franklin was unable to escape the grasp of ‘The Spider’ and it ruined his nose.

In Muay Thai, the finest clinch fighter s in history are Nak Muays such as Dieselnoi, Petchboonchu FA Group, Yothin FA Group, Yodkhunpon Sittraiphum, Superlek Kiatmoo9 , Namsaknoi Yudthagarngamtorn, Yodwicha Por Boonsit, and Sylvie von Dugglas-Ittu, among many others.

Here are even more step-by-step visual guides on specific Muay Tahi clinch techniques taught by the experts.

Muay Thai clinching has always been a key piece in Muay Thai even prior to it being formalized with rules, gloves, and rings. Fights even during the Muay Boran days would often involve intense clinching.

To be a master Muay Thai striker, one must master how to utilize the clinch effectively and defend strikes in the clinch. We have listed numerous how-to guides so that rising fighters can start wrapping their head around the clinch. However, the best practice is to get in the gym and practice with your coach.

Timothy Wheaton is a combat sports writer who covers MMA, Kickboxing, and Muay Thai. Tim is the authority on kickboxing and combat sports journalist who has covered K-1, PRIDE FC, UFC, GLORY Kickboxing, Bellator, ONE Championship, and plenty more.