Title: The Beginner’s Guide To Leg Kicks In MMA | Evolve Daily
URL: https://evolve-mma.com/blog/the-beginners-guide-to-leg-kicks-in-mma/
Source Type: Web Article

Leg kicks are an essential part of the MMA striking game. Anyone who underrates or underuses them is neglecting versatile weapons that could help them control or win a fight.

Throughout the history of mixed martial arts, athletes have used low kicks as game-changers in fights. When they’re used well , they can slow an opponent down, compromise their mobility, or even finish them off.

Some fighters avoid throwing leg kicks because they think they can be put them in danger of being taken down, but if you learn to throw them the right way, you’ll reduce that risk and open up an array of options for inflicting damage.

In this technique clinic, Evolve MMA Head Coach and MMA World Champion Siyar “The Great” Bahadurzada will show you how, with help from ONE Championship flyweight star Kim Kyu Sung.

When you’re done, you’ll know how to throw a few types of low kicks – including inside leg kicks and calf kicks – how to set them up, and how not to throw them.

NOTE: All instructions are for an orthodox fighter facing an orthodox fighter.

Outside Leg Kick

We’ll start with the basics and the kind of leg kick that will probably come to mind first – a hard strike with your rear leg to your opponent’s front leg.

This is a technique any martial arts fan will have seen a million times in MMA, Muay Thai , and kickboxing . These tips will give you the tools to strike effectively in any of those sports.

The key to this strike is that it must be thrown with enough force to damage your opponent. A leg kick without that power carries a lot of risk for very little reward. Weak low kicks fuel the myth that leg kicks are not safe.

If you do not commit to your strike, you won’t be able to affect your rival, and you’ll give them a great chance to counter. The classic retort is a right cross , and there are countless examples of KOs from that kind of strike.

The second fundamental aspect of this leg kick is that it must be set up. Finally, you’ll need to stay out of danger as you launch your shin toward your opponent’s thigh to minimize any chance of getting caught out.

With all that said, here is a step-by-step guide to the outside leg kick.

The first step is vital. First, your back leg has to come a long way to hit its target, so it’s pivotal that you give your opponent something to think about to disguise it.

This distraction can also mess up their co-ordination and their plan of attack. If you can make someone hesitate, they can’t react the same way as they would when they are focused on their own offense. It will take a split -second for them to regain that focus , and you can use that to capitalize. Martial arts is about these little moments, and if you don’t use them to your advantage, you’ll put the ball back in your opponent’s court.

Set-up strikes may also make your rival back up. That will make your leg kick more effective because their limb will not be ready to absorb it. When their weight is on their front leg, it will be engaged, so though the strike will hurt, it might not do much damage. If they are moving backward, the muscles will not be ready to absorb the impact from your shin.

With this combo, Siyar puts Kyu Sung on the back foot and capitalizes

Siyar also shows how you can move into a fantastic position to follow up with a combination.

After the kick, Siyar is perfectly placed to unleash a left hook or uppercut , and then follow up with a right hand and another left. However, Kyu Sung is also a sitting duck for a takedown . What you do with this opportunity should depend on what feels good to you.

Inside Leg Kick

The second leg kick we’ll cover is the inside leg kick . The timing is a little different, but this is another technique that can move your opponent and set them up to get hit with a killer combo.

As before, you’ll need a good set-up for your leg kick, and a right cross is a perfect tool for this one. Just throw it from your orthodox stance , then kick as instructed above.

The inside leg kick will also move your rival’s leg. That will put him off- balance and open him up to be taken down – if that’s part of your game plan. However, as a natural striker, Siyar loves to attack next with a right uppercut if his distance is right. If there is a little more distance between him and Kyu Sung, a one-two is the perfect follow-up combination.

Calf Kick

Hardcore MMA fans will have seen a recent rise in the popularity of the calf kick .

The technique was once rarely seen outside of traditional martial arts, but it has become a significant strike in kickboxing and MMA in the past few years. That’s no surprise once athletes saw how it can affect the legs and an opponent’s movement.

The idea of calf kick is to slow down a fast and/or powerful striker. If their front leg is damaged, their ability to move forward and unleash heavy strikes will be reduced. A numb leg will make it hard for them to judge movement and compromise their balance, and that will slow them down.

The approach for this technique will depend on the situation. First, take a look at how to counter an oncoming attacker.

The second approach makes you the aggressor. If your opponent likes to come in and exchange but is flat-footed, you can stop his aggression before it starts by slowing him down.

This is another strike that will move your rival’s leg way out of position. Once they’re off-balance, they’re just asking to be hit with a combination. Siyar loves to land in a southpaw stance and throw a left uppercut. If that doesn’t get the KO, he follows with a right elbow .

The beauty of these strikes is they will come from angles your opponent cannot see, and those are the most dangerous. If Kyu Sung cannot see what’s coming, he won’t adjust and prepare his body for the impact, meaning he is more liable to be knocked out.

Blocking Leg Kicks

Now you know how to throw a few types of leg kicks, you should practice how to defend them, too.

The classic defense used in Muay Thai , kickboxing, and MMA is the check. Clashing shins may seem hardcore to martial arts novices, but trust us, it’s better to go shin-on-shin than have your thigh chopped up.

You’ve got a good chance of hurting your opponent with this approach, especially if they have bad technique and land with their foot or the lower part of their shin.

This block is simple, but there are some key points to remember.

Blocking inside leg kicks require a similar approach. Just lift your leg and turn it inward to go shin-on-shin – you’ll have to turn your shoulders, too. If all goes to plan, you will catch the softest part of his shin on the hardest part of yours.

Constant drilling will make these second-nature , but make sure you practice with shin guards! Otherwise, you’ll limp home from the gym.

Countering Leg Kicks

The final lesson of this leg kick masterclass is how to respond after you’ve successfully defended a strike.

The key is to be quick and reply before your opponent puts their kicking leg down. So, as Kyu Sung is moving back into position, Siyar steps forward and attacks with one of these three strikes

Because you will have turned to your left to check, a strike from your left side will feel more natural and land with a lot of momentum. Also, because Kyu Sung is close to Siyar, he’s in the perfect range to be hit.

By the same logic, a right-sided strike is suitable after checking an inside leg kick. Because you have turned your shoulders to the right to block, you are perfectly placed to unleash your right cross as you turn back.

If you want to learn the art and science martial arts under World Champions, sign up for a trial class today!

Book your complimentary trial class with our World Champions below!

If you have any other questions regarding Evolve MMA and the programs we offer, you can get in touch with our membership executives at the following locations:

Evolve MMA (Far East Square) 26 China Street Far East Square #01-01 Singapore 049568 Phone: (65) 6536 4525

Evolve MMA (Orchard Central) 181 Orchard Road #06-01 Orchard Central Singapore 238896 Phone: (65) 6536 4556

Evolve MMA (KINEX) 11 Tanjong Katong Road #02-52 KINEX Singapore 437157 Phone: (65) 6288 2293

Evolve MMA (Clarke Quay Central) 6 Eu Tong Sen Street #04-18 Clarke Quay Central Singapore 059817 Phone: (65) 6226 2150

Evolve Mixed Martial Arts® is Asia's premier championship brand for martial arts. It has authentic World Champions in Muay Thai, Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu, Mixed Martial Arts, Boxing, Wrestling, and No-Gi Grappling. Named as the #1 ranked martial arts organization in Asia by CNN, Yahoo! Sports, FOX Sports, ESPN StarSports, Tokyo Times, and many other leading authorities, Evolve MMA aims to deliver the best martial arts instruction available anywhere on the planet.

Summary The southpaw stance is one of the most disruptive and misunderstood positions in combat sports. Defined by a right-foot-forward, left-hand-rear alignment, the southpaw flips the geometry of every exchange, forcing orthodox opponents to adjust…

Summary Everyone has a natural fighting style. Some instinctively look to bombard opponents with volume, while others prefer a more cautious approach. Some people feel more comfortable throwing strikes at attackers, while others prefer to…

Summary Have you ever heard that voice that says, “Maybe I should get my backside off the couch and do something cool?” MMA could be the fun new activity you’re looking for. No, training won’t…

Summary You’re in the heat of battle during a mixed martial arts (MMA) contest. Your opponent throws hard strikes at you with without caution, giving you plenty of opportunities to land precise counters. But then…

Summary One of the most incredible things about mixed martial arts (MMA) is the thrilling game of chess that’s played whenever you step on the mat. You must constantly think of ways to solve problems…

Summary Mixed Martial Arts is no longer just a male-dominated sport. More women than ever are stepping into MMA gyms for fitness, self-defense, and personal growth. But starting can feel intimidating without a clear roadmap….

Summary Professional boxing is governed by four major sanctioning bodies that award world championship belts across multiple weight divisions: the World Boxing Association (WBA), World Boxing Council (WBC), International Boxing Federation (IBF), and World Boxing…

Summary In Muay Thai, the clinch is not a stalling tactic; it is a complete fighting system where many bouts are won and lost. This article breaks down the six essential clinch grips (double collar-tie,…

Summary In boxing, knockouts are rarely accidental, they are the result of precise technique, timing, and the effective use of high-impact punches. This article highlights three of the most effective knockout punches: the cross, the…

Summary Oleksandr Usyk is considered one of the greatest boxers today. Still undefeated, Oleksandr has recently defeated boxing heavyweight giants like Anthony Joshua (twice), Daniel Dubois, and Tyson Fury (twice). While he’s still relatively new…

Summary Becoming a great fighter in martial arts requires more than strength, speed, or endurance—you must also be smart. While most martial artists typically aren’t viewed as the most cerebral members of society, there are…

Summary Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu is a constantly evolving martial art that rewards those who explore new positions and attacking strategies. The arm saddle is one of the more advanced yet highly effective positions that have gained…

LIVE LIKE A WARRIOR

Enter your email below and get inspired to unleash your greatness

Evolve Daily guarantees 100% privacy. Your information will not be shared.